Cas multiwake documentation (#1878)
sifive/wake: share/doc/wake/workspace-virtualization-and-multi-wake.md

Reviewer: Can we split this doc please? I think each feature warrants their own space.

Author: went ahead and did this

Traditionally, wake tracked — but did not own — the build outputs produced by
jobs. The build directory was primarily yours; wake simply recorded what it
last saw and used that to decide what to run next. The workspace was the source
of truth.

With workspace virtualization, the source of truth moves into wake's own state:
the database and, especially, the CAS. Your workspace becomes a materialization
of the outputs of your runs' jobs.

Because outputs are content-addressed and shared safely, multiple wake
processes can run at the same time in the same workspace, reusing completed
jobs from one another while preserving all of wake's existing correctness and
safety guarantees.

Some things this makes possible:

- Run wake interactively — lint, format-check, test a variant — while one or
  more long builds are already in progress.
- Use `bsp-wake` / Scala Metals without waiting for other wake activity to
  finish.
- Kick off multiple independent builds (different configs, different targets) in
  the same workspace without maintaining separate checkouts.

## Key concepts

### Workspace virtualization

Sandboxed runners (the default) no longer write directly through to your

> workspace. Instead:

Reviewer 2: The historical note in the previous section provides a good framework for how Wake ensures safety and how it might not follow people's expectations of simpler build systems.  By this section, however, we should just be talking about the current state rather than in terms of "no longer".

1. While a job runs, the data it writes lands in a staging directory under
   `.build/cas/staging/`.
2. When the job completes, its outputs are ingested into the CAS.
3. Wake materializes those outputs into their destination paths using
   **reflinks** (copy-on-write) rather than writing them directly.

Materializing through reflinks means identical content is stored only once on

> disk, and runs do not interfere with one another.

Reviewer 2: Mention that changes the user makes to the workspace don't propagate back to invalidate the CAS?

### Content-addressed storage (CAS)

All job outputs are stored by content hash under `.build/cas/blobs/`, similar to
the git object store. Wake materializes outputs into your workspace *from* the
CAS rather than writing them directly. Because content is keyed by its hash,
identical files across jobs, targets, or runs share a single underlying blob.

> **The CAS is owned by wake.** Files under `.build/cas/` must never be modified
> by hand. Doing so results in undefined behavior — wake assumes it is the sole

> > owner of everything in this space.

Reviewer 2: Personal dislike for non-semantic markup, but I'd prefer if we were setting off the "pay attention to this" block in some way other than pretending it's a quote.

### The workspace as a projection of wake state

With workspace virtualization, the database and CAS are the source of truth, and
the workspace is a materialization of your jobs' outputs.

A direct consequence: **deleting your build directory does not reclaim the
underlying disk footprint**, because the outputs still live in the CAS. If you
delete materialized outputs and later re-run that job, wake can re-materialize
the outputs from the CAS without re-executing the work.

This is also why a common debugging technique — editing a file in the workspace
and re-running a `wakebox` spec — no longer behaves as it used to. Wakebox

> refers to the CAS, not the workspace.

Reviewer 2: (A) This is another example of "no longer" which should be reworded, and (B) I'm not sure this was ever a *common* debugging technique for anyone outside the small handful of people closest to Wake.

builds:

| Option        | Description                                                          |
| ------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `--history`   | Report the command-line history of all wake commands, including completed and in-flight runs. |
| `--ps`        | Show jobs currently running in active wake builds.                   |
| `--active`    | Capture jobs currently running in active builds.                     |
| `--queued`    | Capture jobs queued but not yet launched in active builds.           |
| `--in-flight` | Capture jobs running or queued in active builds.                     |

## Managing workspace disk usage with CAS

Because the CAS is the source of truth, managing disk usage is about managing
the CAS and database — not about deleting files in your workspace.

### Why the build directory is not where space lives

Reflinked, content-addressed storage means:

- Identical outputs are stored once and shared, so the CAS is typically far
  smaller than the sum of all materialized copies would suggest.
- Removing materialized files (for example, `rm -rf` of a build directory) frees

>   only the lightweight reflinked references, **not** the underlying blobs in the

Reviewer 2: A highly-personal nit, but the HTML5-inspired semantic markup guidelines I hold closely to in my own work:  Two asterisks (analogous to `<strong>`) can be used to set off important but not emphasized text, along with their historic usage (analogous to `<b>`) of setting off keywords and informal "headers".  Single asterisks (analogous to `<em>`) are what's used when there *is* a distinct vocal/presentational change in how the text would be read out loud.  To round it off, that single-quote usage holds true for all distinct vocal registers[^i] even when they aren't specifically emphasizing that part of the text (analogous to `<i>`).  Luckily Markdown doesn't divide the last two subtleties to the same degree that HTML tries to.[^underscore]
```suggestion
  only the lightweight reflinked references, *not* the underlying blobs in the
```

[^i]: Foreign languages being the classic example, but I'll also use that markup (sometimes with different CSS/target-appropriate styling) for things like sarcasm.

[^underscore]: Except that I like making things overly complicated for myself, and actually re-introduce that difference by distinguishing `*...*`/`<em>` and `**...**`/`<strong>` from the canonically-synonymous `_..._`/`<i>` and `__...__`/`<b>`.  It requires hacking anything I use to render out HTML, though, and a fair bit of the time if I'm going to that effort I wind up just writing the HTML directly so I have access to the full suite of tags.

- Run wake interactively — lint, format-check, test a variant — while one or
  more long builds are already in progress.
- Run IDE or editor integrations (such as language servers)
  without waiting for other wake activity to finish (e.g. Scala Metals).
- Kick off multiple independent builds (different configs, different targets) in
  the same workspace without maintaining separate checkouts.

## Key concepts

### Workspace virtualization

Sandboxed runners (that utilize FUSE) do not write directly through to your
workspace. Instead:

1. While a job runs, the data it writes lands in a staging directory under
   `.build/cas/staging/`.
2. When the job completes, its outputs are ingested into the CAS.
3. Wake materializes those outputs into their destination paths using
   **reflinks** (copy-on-write).

Materializing through reflinks means identical content is stored only once on
disk, and runs do not interfere with one another. This also means that changes that a user makes to the workspace don't propogate back to invalidate the CAS.

### Content-addressed storage (CAS)

All job outputs are stored by content hash under `.build/cas/blobs/`, similar to

> the git object store. Wake materializes outputs into your workspace *from* the

Reviewer: NIT
```suggestion
All job outputs are stored by content hash under `.build/cas/blobs/`. Wake materializes outputs into your workspace *from* the
```

so edits made directly in the workspace are not picked up.

## Running multiple wake invocations concurrently

Multiple wake processes may run concurrently in the same workspace. They
coordinate through the shared workspace database and CAS, and a run will reuse
jobs that other runs have already completed.

For non-concurrent use, behavior is designed to be identical to a single wake
invocation. Concurrency simply allows additional processes to participate in,
and benefit from, the same shared state.

### Observing active runs

Several command-line options let you inspect what is happening across all active
builds:

| Option        | Description                                                          |
| ------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `--history`   | Report the command-line history of all wake commands, including completed and in-flight runs. |
| `--ps`        | Show jobs currently running in active wake builds.                   |
| `--active`    | Capture jobs currently running in active builds.                     |
| `--queued`    | Capture jobs queued but not yet launched in active builds.           |

> | `--in-flight` | Capture jobs running or queued in active builds.                     |

Reviewer: While these features are introduced in this branch, these are directly tied to these features no?

Author: I can remove the `--active` , `--queued`, and `--in-flight` if we want users to only interact with `--history` and `--ps`
